[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone and
welcome to the first episode in the
second series of church history and
theology I have been looking forward to
restarting this for several months and
today we finally get to lay it out and
uh Express what Our intention is and
what our aims are and uh kind of who I
am and why I'm doing this um I
understand that there's many people who
over the months will be looking back to
this episode as a place to get started
and uh so I figured it would be a good
place to reintroduce myself and uh kind
of explain to you what I'm doing why I
do this um and and where exactly I'm
coming from and how I think about all
these things so if you have just
stumbled upon uh the podcast and are
wondering what's going on why is episode
78 starting over um there's a bit of a
history here I have taught through
church history multiple times and I have
learned through it multiple times and
every single time I do it I become more
and more fascinated with the people of
God that he has placed before our time
and one of the things that I really am
looking forward to is delving into some
of the more intricate stories of the
years gone by and uh as we delve into
that getting to take our time with it um
I have expressed before that the typical
Way Church History is taught it is
taught on the semester level it is
taught predominantly taught in about 50
to 60 episodes so that you can fit it
into two semesters uh for all 20
centuries and it dawned on me about a
year and a half ago that there's no
reason for me to do that um I love
teaching church history and I love
taking my time with it and there's so
many stories that you have to skim over
the top of in order to teach it that way
and I have no intention of teaching it
that way I want to teach it uh slowly
methodically intentionally in depth as I
can and as long as the roses smell sweet
we'll stop and smell them and that's
kind of my intention going forward and
uh I hope you are uh prepared to enjoy
quite a a quite a trip um I know I have
many many episodes planned even just in
the first century uh I'm up to about 30
episodes planned for that and and then
for the centuries that follow um some
will have more some will have less I can
assure you the 4th Century will have
more than that um there's so many
different places to look so many
different documents to read and um I I
love doing this and I will continue
doing it for many many years to come so
let me give you a brief uh summation of
who I am and uh what my biases are
before we even get started into all of
this because everyone has them and it
would be helpful for you to know on the
front end my name is Tim Easley I am
currently a doctoral candidate at
Evangelical Seminary in biblical
theology that's not this is not in the
area of church history church history is
a fascination of mine I have loved it
since the first time I took it uh back
over 20 years ago and I began studying
in Earnest about 15 years ago and I have
now taught it for 7 years and however
long this uh walk through will be which
it is panning out at least in my plans
and you know how those go uh in my plans
it's panning out to be many many years
and I'm looking forward to it and I'm
glad that I get to set aside today and
look forward to that um so I'm I'm 40
years old I I'm a pastor of a church
locally I live uh in New York state and
um and love it here I have four children
and uh my wife and I have been married
now for going on 18 years and church
history as far as my studies here again
this has kind of been born out of just
an old fascination of mine I have many
books that I read on the topic I have
many uh primary sources it's one of my
favorite ways to study this is to go
back and read people in their own words
in their own ways of describing in what
they believe what they think about these
things um I will tell you my biases on
the front end because it doesn't matter
who you are uh your biases are always
going to come into a study on church
history um and we'll talk a little bit
about some of the uh some of the ways we
can avoid that some of the goals we
should have some of the goals we should
not have um but let me give you mine I
am theologically uh Reformed Baptist um
as far as that is concerned it does not
mean that I cannot study other branches
of the church I have great respect uh
for almost every branch of the church uh
even some of the ones that would be
considered by some off limits um I have
respect for people even when they're
wrong and and that includes myself we
are all wrong on certain areas of
theology we are all wrong in how exactly
the world goes on we are wrong in all
sorts of areas of culture of theology
even of the interpretation of the
scriptures but when we come to the
question of Salvation when we come to
the question of church polity I
currently find myself in the Reformed
Baptist uh world that does not mean that
I do not treat others with respect when
it comes to uh a respect that is owed
nor does it mean that I turn a blind eye
to the weaknesses of my own uh movements
as we get later on nor uh to turn a
blind eye to the weaknesses of others um
when we go through church history one of
my goals is to try to get us to see it
as it is um now I readily admit I don't
have the ability to be objective about
church history nobody does you don't I
don't nobody can but I think it's really
helpful for you to understand my biases
going forward I am Protestant I am not
Eastern Orthodox I am not Catholic as
far as uh the Roman Church is concerned
um um but again I find multiple things
in multiple strains of those especially
in the first Millennia that uh I would
align my myself with directly um and um
as far as we go through these things I
hope you can appreciate and I hope you
have the AIM uh of studying these things
with an honest eye uh to see the
weaknesses because nobody's organization
is perfect uh nobody's church is without
sin nobody's church is the standard and
if yours thinks it is I'll just tell you
straight up I'm not going to agree with
that on the front end um I will teach
church history the way I see it if you
want to teach church history another way
you're welcome to uh certainly no issue
for me on that um but as far as my
biases are concerned that's where I
stand there's always been kind of uh
question about that uh it's where I am
uh I do not I do not vehemently support
or say everyone should be that I
actually find a great deal of strength
uh when the church is in different
denominations believe it or not I
believe this to be one of the intentions
uh we'll talk about that as we go
forward um right so when we talk about
church history it's important to make
the question what kind of scope what are
we looking at how do we even Define
church history at all what is it um what
are its boundaries how do we Define
these things well there's one way to
talk about it and that is a way that is
is common in more nerdy circles and that
is to say that church history really has
to do with the entire Assembly of God
from the very first people saved all the
way to the very last people saved so
that should really not even read cre to
today it should read creation to
consummation um but that's that's a
story for another time and when we talk
about church history we really don't
talk about it in terms of creation to
today um though it would certainly be
viable to discuss these things if you
want to read of the church throughout
the Old Testament era you can read your
Old Testament um as far as it is
concerned what we are going to do is
discuss the scope of church history from
the Ascension of Jesus Christ to today
that period of time that Jesus At The
Great Commission explains as the time
the age in which to the very end of he
never abandons his
people that is the scope of this study
um so we will pick up there we are going
to be several several months in the book
of Acts uh because there's so many
aspects of that we have an entire book
there in the New Testament on church
history and we are going to dive deep
into some of these issues as we go
forward talking about all manner of
things from how difficult it was for the
church to to uh assimilate the concept
of Jews being saved um how difficult it
was for people to um uh to walk through
uh how the the the entire shift between
the old Covenant and the New Covenant is
taking place uh how they worshiped
communion uh baptism what do we see in
scripture what do we see in the early
church
uh Jerusalem as a city will have its own
episode uh here soon uh the type of
multi- apostolic leadership in the
earliest Church especially in The
Universal Church we're going to spend
some nights uh an entire evening with
Phillip and the uh and the beginning of
the church in Ethiopia uh we're going to
talk about the city of Antioch and its
significance things like this uh
obviously Apostles like Paul and Peter
uh James the Lord's brother who seemed
to be U Proto Bishop if not bishop or
Pastor Elder whatever you want to call
we'll delve into that of the Jerusalem
Church um and that kind of breaks into
bigger questions Elders deacons and
where did bishops come from and
Metropolitan Bishops and you know all
this kind of stuff how do we swallow all
of this how do we conceive of all of
this that is part of my goal here um and
why I study these things starting at
ension forward is because it is the
leaving of Christ out of the world them
waiting in Jerusalem to rece receive
power on high the spirit of God coming
into his people and indwelling them
forever and so we spend time with the
apostolic um with the apostolic Ministry
of the miraculous Norm that's there that
gets eclipsed as time goes on um the
replacement of you know physical
Apostles with their physical writings
and the expectation of a new testament
uh scripture not having been finished
yet so we look forward to all of these
types of things I have an entire evening
on uh the inevitability of the New
Testament and uh we should delve into
that pretty pretty good so our scope
really is going to cover it's going to
start there at Ascension and it's going
to come all the way up to today I have
no idea how long this is is going to
take I have walked through church
history now uh two full walkthroughs in
teaching uh in both teaching and
learning five uh throughout
undergraduate and graduate school um but
this one I'm most excited about because
as I have taught church history history
now for for 7 years um in podcast form
in Bible study format at churches Etc I
finally have pieced together what I have
dubbed and this is why I've structured
it differently I have finally pieced
together how I would have liked to have
learned church history if I could just
rewind my own past and go back to the
time where I didn't know anything about
church history and take everything I
know now and dump it into me
this is how I would want to learn it I
would want to start with what it is and
how we see it I would want to I would
want to prevent me from looking back
into the F past and trying to find
people that remind me of me so that I
can feel like some sort of legitimacy um
I i' I'd want to understand Christ as
the head of the church before I ever get
into talking about uh the the happenings
rather than focusing on things like
Creeds I'd want to sit and focus on the
people on the events even on the cities
um these types of things are enormously
important they are part of our story
they are part of who we are as
Christians and that really delves into
how it is that we will study church
history and this gets really into my own
concept of church history uh there's not
a lot of people that teach it like this
but uh I can certainly say this is how I
teach it I teach church history as an
extension of
Fellowship Church History is as messy as
Church
Fellowship you were going to find people
that you were disappointed with you were
going to find people that are Heretics
people that are friends people that
would like you people that don't like
you uh people that would approve of you
people that would not approve of you
you're going to find everyone in
Church's history you're going to find
everyone of every Walk of Life people
who take theology to its limits people
who take it Beyond its limits people who
care very little about it but understand
very little about it but understand that
very very well you're going to see all
sorts of things and we're going to get
to walk through a lot of this stuff and
that really gets me to the heart of why
we do this why it is we walk through uh
this type of thing why do we study this
um which uh two weeks from now by the
way we are going to have an entire
episode on this on why we study church
history but let me give you an overview
of in just a single
sentence we do not study church history
in order to find leg legitimacy for our
beliefs or movements we study church
history to gain wisdom from our brothers
and sisters it is an honor to their
memory to who they are and to who they
are in Christ for us to listen and to
learn it is
with with wonderful blessing that we get
to do this we get to understand and
learn from people who have gone past we
can't learn from people who have yet
been born right it's our job to teach
them but in in order to teach them we
have to learn from those who came before
us and so we actually have to set aside
ourselves and serve one another and so
when we look back at church history I
always challenge people to see it as a
form of Fellowship we open ourselves up
to the service of those who came before
looking to give honor to their memory
and even if they're wrong which by the
way everyone is including yourself and
myself we are all wrong on certain
levels I don't care if you're Pope I
don't care if you're a pastor I don't
care if you're apostle everyone's wrong
at some point
somewhere but we still show honor to one
another as brothers and sisters assuming
they are indeed brothers and sisters
because we have a message of the Gospel
to hand down and we do have our own
story to hand down something that I will
say the church in the west at least in
my country is not very good at is
appreciating where they came from and
why they believe the things that they
believe a lot of people at least in the
Protestant World tend to think that they
believe what they believe simply because
the Bible says it but to to even
reference how Jesus speaks about uh
things or how we speak about Jesus's
Incarnation and to not realize that
athanasius and Augustine um and and
their verbiage sits right with us in the
way we talk about these things means
that we stand on the shoulders of
strangers to us and I don't want us to
stand on the shoulders of strangers I
want us to be able to say thank you and
to to the Lord for providing for us wise
people in our
past brothers and sisters that we can
listen to and appreciate and be thankful
to God for and then hand down this type
of uh the not only just the teachings
but also the habits the way to see the
Lord from a different perspective the
appreciation of these things I think
goes straight back to the Lord but that
gives us kind of one of the boundaries
of church history doesn't it because the
only way to study church history is to
study the visible Church the
organizations the movements the splits
the events the people that claim to be
Christians the visible church is part of
a distinction uh that is very common as
I said one of my biases is I am reform
Baptist part of the reform tradition is
to define the difference between the
visible and the invisible church and so
that is going to uh spark and uh and
even morph the way I will talk about
certain things um I do not believe
joining a church saves somebody I do not
believe that the term church should
apply that way um just because you are
part of one does not make you a part of
the church in Heaven There is as I would
Define it as I believe scripture would
and I think this is a faithful
representation there is an invisible
Body of
Christ we do not know the identity of
all the elect and certainly if you could
know them in your own timeline because
you measured fruit and so forth our view
of history is so minute compared to what
it was we see so little of what it
actually was that we're limited to be
able to even figure out who that is and
so it is important for us to be able to
make distinction we are not just dealing
with the those who are easy to see those
who are easy to come across the visible
church we have to also realize that
there's an invisible Church which means
at any point that we are paying
attention to an organization at any
point that we're paying attention to um
say the Presbyterian church or the
Methodist Church or the Catholic church
or the Eastern Orthodox Church um or the
um Eastern Church uh where wherever
we're looking at these things we have to
realize that we are looking at a mixed
group right of of Believers and
unbelievers every single organized
church has a mixture um this is how I'm
going to put this forward and so
shouldn't surprise us that we see
organizations sometimes doing things
that are
Unthinkable at least
us because again we have a mixture of
Christians and unbelievers and so you
have influences from both now here's the
thing just because you do something
Unthinkable to one age it does not mean
that you are an unbeliever as well to
the uh the thoughts of another age I
will say this when we study church
history and we see things happening
that we do not approve of or we see
things that are outside of what we would
be comfortable even defining as a
legitimate church I I want to caution us
there is something that CS Lewis
referred to and that is called
chronological snobbery and it's not
something that I want us to be in the
habit of carrying out I want us to be
able to look at the past and if somebody
is doing something and this is always my
lipus test if somebody comes to a
conclusion or does something that you
find just Unthinkable and
crazy I'm going to put forward the most
likely description of this the most
likely option here is that you have not
understood who they are first because if
somebody is that surprising to you the
reality is you may not know them well
enough I'm not saying you understand
them so that you would agree with them
I'm saying if what they're doing is
still surprising to you I'm going to
suggest you do not know them or their
culture or their beliefs well enough and
this is one of the things that we like
to like to delve into on church history
and theology we like to get down and and
see even the the primary writings of
some of someone we I ideally I don't
want to deal with secondary or tertiary
sources I really want to deal with
primary sources when we work through
these things but then we're also quite
limited to what has been preserved over
the years um but as as given to us
however we can we're going to delve into
it as best as we can and that really
sums up kind of the concept of where
we're going to go so let me give you a
kind of a breakdown of what we're
looking forward to um as we start this
new series um we are um no longer going
to be live streaming we are going to be
posting these videos up ahead of time uh
every other Wednesday night and today is
May 1st
2024 uh the plan is that every two weeks
another uh video or if you're listening
on the podcast which I know uh many many
many of you do um you will be receiving
the audio podcasts every Wednesday every
other week and as we work through this
there's going to be a couple of changes
and some morphs along the way I'll I'll
keep you updated with this but this is
kind of going to be going forward some
of you have asked how to support the
show I've put that kind of stuff in the
show notes as well if you want to help
with hosting if you want to help with uh
uh development and things like that or
even uh equipment uh all of this stuff
is supported by yours truly I don't ever
do any advertisers and not going to um
and but if you want to help support that
the the link to that is in the show
notes there's plenty of other things in
the show notes as well uh such as where
wherever else you can find this uh if
you want to listen on Spotify or YouTube
or if you really want to send in a
question uh my email is right in there
um it would be a great thing to be able
to answer I know a lot of you have
sought me out on LinkedIn and everywhere
else and uh send me questions and I love
that and I I'll tell you I've I never
Tire of talking about church history um
there was a uh there's a gentleman who
reached out to me actually give you a
for instance on this reached out for me
to uh talk about some of the
developments of um of worship practices
uh in Africa in the mid 1800s and we
were talking about that and because of
the time difference and whatnot had to
wake up at 4:00 a.m. my time to be able
to sit and talk about this and he
couldn't believe he was like wow you
really want to get up and talk that time
in the morning I was absolutely this
kind of stuff is fascinating to me um
24/7 and it's been a Fascination it
continues to be a Fascination I tell you
if you're open to uh a trek of years
long I intend this to be um I'm only 40
I got a lot of years left hopefully and
uh as long as as long as we continue on
I look forward to uh teaching these and
providing you with uh some of the best
ways to study church history because I
believe our story is Central to our hope
and it is a testament of what God is
doing in this world and what he will
continue to do um should he t for yet
another 2,000 years which I think is
highly probable as well um as we work
through this if you have any questions
you are always welcome to post them up
pretty much anywhere it'll send me an
email or you can look in the show notes
and find my email there church history
and theology proton uh you can always
send me an email and uh I would love to
answer any questions there's um
uh just one little housekeeping thing
here at the end again we will have a new
episode every two weeks um if you are
looking to uh some of you have reached
out to me over the past months and asked
for uh permission to do things like
translation or um or or reposting
somewhere else or something like this I
have now uh applied the the Creative
Commons 4.0 license to this if you're
not interested in all this just glaze
over the next 20 seconds um that means
you're able to to freely download copy
share remix translate Etc um you just
have to give credit to church history
and theology link to the license and
indicate if changes were made um I want
all of these things to be as spread far
as you can I'm not looking to build
castles I am looking to enjoy the
kingdom of heaven and uh so if you're
able to do that do so just you cannot
use them for commercial purposes um you
are welcome to translate I know there's
there's someone translating them into
Portuguese um you're you're welcome to
do these uh as much as you want um with
that I will say thank you very much for
joining us on our new series um each uh
uh each and every other week we will be
delving into a new aspect of this next
time we are together fortn night from
now is why study church history and
we're going to get into the effect that
it has on our ecclesiology our hope our
eschatology and everything else so until
then Lord's blessings to you all may God
bless you
[Music]
[Applause]